CONJECTURE 00000007767 — REPRODUCTION

Scope
This submission disproves the explicit leading equivalence in the standard
complex-polynomial setting, using positive compositional iterates. The source
does not explicitly specify the field or index range; see main.tex for the
disclosed conventions. The undefined trailing Ritt uniqueness clause is not
formalized. The exact bilingual source is conjecture.md.

Formal proof
The actual complex polynomials X^2 and X^3 induce maps on P^1(C), modeled by
Option Complex with some z = [z:1] and none = [1:0]. The Lean definitions and
theorem statements, including the hypotheses, are printed in verification/axioms.txt.

Use Lean 4.19.0, pinned by lean/lean-toolchain. From lean/:

  lake exe cache get
  lake build
  lake env lean -DwarningAsError=true Conjecture7767.lean
  lake env lean -DwarningAsError=true Check.lean
  lake env lean -DwarningAsError=true ../verification/environment-inventory.lean

The manifest pins all nine dependencies; Mathlib is v4.19.0, commit
c44e0c8ee63ca166450922a373c7409c5d26b00b. Do not update the manifest for this
reproduction. Cache retrieval requires network access and is a build accelerator;
it does not replace replaying the submitted mathematical source.

The final theorem is Conjecture7767.conjecture_false. The theorem
Conjecture7767.counterexample bundles the degrees, commutation, infinite
intersection, and negation of every common positive iterate. No finite Python
calculation is used by either Lean proof.

Check.lean prints all 11 authored definitions/abbreviations and all 18 theorem
types and axiom dependencies. The environment-inventory harness prints every
compiled constant whose origin is Conjecture7767, including generated constants;
it is inspection code only and proves no mathematical theorem.

Finite exact checks
Python 3 with only the standard library is required. From auxiliary/:

  python3 -B run_checks.py

This executes check.py normally and with -O, records complete JSON output and
stderr, requires byte-identical successful results, and regenerates run_metadata.json
and SHA256SUMS.txt. Timings, absolute paths, Python version and the metadata hash
will naturally differ on another machine. The mathematical JSON results should
remain identical. No assert statements are used for mathematical checks.

Coverage: exact sparse polynomial composition and iteration, independent integer
iteration at z=2 through index 12, all 144 positive index pairs up to 12, all roots
of unity modulo 5,25,125,625 in exact rational-angle coordinates, full doubling
and tripling cycles and minimal positive periods, primitive roots and their
disjointness, affine zero, and infinity. This bounded check proves neither
infinitude nor the absence of common iterates beyond its stated bounds.

PDF
main.tex is standalone. From the submission root:

  tectonic --outdir . main.tex

The shipped PDF was exported with Tectonic 0.17.0, checked with pdfinfo, and all
three pages rendered with pdftoppm and visually inspected. The same source also
compiled with the Codex desktop LaTeX compiler. A normal LaTeX installation can
also compile it; PDF bytes can differ across engines and font versions. The
shipped source/PDF hashes and export log establish this submission's identity.

Evidence and boundaries
VERIFICATION.txt summarizes the completed local checks. Raw proof/audit output,
the full auxiliary output and execution metadata, semantic review, eligibility
records, and file hashes accompany the submission. Paths beginning /private/tmp
in records identify the original validation environment, not required portable
locations or additional submitted files. Local independent review is not
maintainer acceptance. No repository metadata or leaderboard is modified.
