Conjecture 00000000637   C0ldSmi1e  The full twist is not generated by its square  Disproof of conjecture 00000000637  C0ldSmi1e   —   5 October 2026  Result.   At the allowed strand number   n   = 3 , the full twist   T   is a central pure braid but does not belong to   〈 T   2 〉 .   This disproves the center assertion and hence the conjecture’s conjunction.   No claim about stable commutator length is needed or proved.  1. Original statement and precise scope  The original file is reproduced byte for byte as   original-conjecture.md . Its two versions, with mathematical notation typeset, are:  English.   Definition: The center   Z ( P n )   of the pure braid group. Conjecture: For   n   ≥   3 ,   Z ( P n )   is generated by the square of the full twist, and the stable commutator length of   P n / Z   is bounded (combining the center with scl).  中文。 定义：纯辫中心   Z ( P n ) 。猜想： P n   的中心由全   twist   的平方生成   ( n   ≥   3 ),   且商   P n / Z   的稳 定交换子长度有界   ( 中心与   scl   的组合 ) 。  We use the standard Artin braid groups of the disk and their pure subgroups. For three strands, put  B 3   =   〈 a, b   |   aba   =   bab 〉 ,   π   :   B 3   −→   S 3 ,   a   7   →   (0 1) ,   b   7   →   (1 2) ,   P 3   =   ker   π.  This is the standard algebraic presentation and permutation-kernel definition [1, 2]; labels   0 ,   1 ,   2   replace the usual   1 ,   2 ,   3 . There are no distant-generator relations at three strands. The center means the actual subgroup of elements commuting with every pure braid, and   〈 u 〉   =   { u k   :   k   ∈   Z } . Write   ∆ =   aba   for the half twist and   T   = ( ab ) 3   = ∆ 2   for the full twist, following the standard convention [3]. Thus the literal square in both source languages is   T   2   = ∆ 4 .   The equality   T   = ∆ 2   is proved below and in Lean; it is not an extra assumption. This submission does not replace “full twist” by “half twist”. The first conjunct has the form   C ( n ) :   Z ( P n ) =   〈 T   2  n   〉 .   The universally quantified conjunction necessarily implies   C (3) . In the second conjunct,   Z   naturally denotes   Z ( P n ) ; the source does not specify the scl domain or whether the bound is uniform in   n . Our argument is independent of these choices: for every proposition  Q ,   ¬ C (3)   implies   ¬ ( C (3)   ∧   Q ) . The parameter   Q   in the Lean conjunction theorem is this logical placeholder, not a definition of scl or of the entire family of braid groups.  2. Purity and centrality of the full twist  The transpositions   (0 1)   and   (1 2)   satisfy the braid relation, so   π   is well defined. Their product is a three-cycle, hence   π (( ab ) 3 ) = 1 . Thus   T   ∈   P 3 . The Artin relation gives  T   = ( ab ) 3   = ( aba )( bab ) = ( aba )( aba ) = ∆ 2 ,   ∆ a   =   b ∆ ,   ∆ b   =   a ∆ .  Indeed,   ∆ a   = ( aba ) a   = ( bab ) a   =   b ( aba )   and   ∆ b   = ( aba ) b   =   a ( bab ) =   a ( aba ) . Consequently   ∆ 2 a   =   a ∆ 2   and  ∆ 2 b   =   b ∆ 2 . Since   a, b   generate   B 3 , their centralizer condition implies that   T   commutes with every element of  B 3 . Restriction to the subgroup   P 3   therefore proves   T   ∈   Z ( P 3 ) . 1

Conjecture 00000000637   C0ldSmi1e  3. The exponent homomorphism separates the square subgroup  Send each of   a, b   to   1   ∈   Z . Both sides of   aba   =   bab   have exponent sum   3 , so this induces a well-defined group homomorphism  e   :   B 3   −→   ( Z ,   +) ,   e ( a ) =   e ( b ) = 1 .  In particular   e ( T   ) = 6   and, for every   integer   k ,  e (( T   2 ) k ) =   k e ( T   2 ) = 12 k.  If   T   = ( T   2 ) k , then   6 = 12 k . No integer satisfies this equation: it would imply   1 = 2 k . Therefore   T   / ∈ 〈 T   2 〉 , with negative powers included.   This argument does not require a structure theorem for   P 3   or an assumed description of its center.  Counterexample.   With the standard definitions above,  T   ∈   Z ( P 3 )   \ 〈 T   2 〉 ,   Z ( P 3 )   6   =   〈 T   2 〉 .  Thus conjecture 00000000637, as written in both languages, is false. Proof.   Section 2 gives membership in the center; the exponent calculation gives nonmembership in the proposed generating subgroup.   Since   3   ≥   3 , the universal source statement includes this false center equality.   A conjunction with a false first conjunct is false, whatever its second conjunct.  4. Correspondence with the formalization  All mathematical declarations lie in namespace   Conjecture637   of   Conjecture637.lean .   They use the standard Mathlib definitions, not custom replacements for center or integer powers. Mathematical object   Formal construction  B 3   and   a, b   BraidThree   is   PresentedGroup braidRelations : free group on   Bool , modulo the normal closure of the single relator   ( aba )( bab ) − 1 .   sigmaOne ,  sigmaTwo   are its generators.  π   and   P 3   strandPermutation   is built by the presentation’s universal property after proving the relation.   pureBraidSubgroup   is its kernel;   PureBrai dThree   is that subgroup as a group.  ∆ , T   halfTwist ,   fullTwist   have the displayed words.   pureFullTwist   pairs  T   with the proved purity witness. Center and   〈 T   2 〉   Mathlib’s   Subgroup.center   and   Subgroup.zpowers , in the actual subgroup   PureBraidThree .  e   exponentSum   takes values in   Multiplicative   Z , the additive group written multiplicatively; the relation and generator values are proved before its use. The proof proceeds through   fullTwist_eq_halfTwist_sq , the two generator commutation lemmas,   full Twist_mem_center ,   fullTwist_is_pure , and   pureFullTwist_mem_center .   Generation of the entire presented group is used to extend commutation beyond the generators. The exponent obstruction is proved in   fullTwist_not_zpower_square ; subtype coercion then yields   pureFullTwist_not_mem_square_zpowers . The decisive theorem is   center_not_generated_by_square_of_fullTwist . The theorem   three_is_in_so urce_range   checks the admissible strand number. Finally,   required_conjunction_at_three_false   proves the negation of   RequiredConjunctionAtThree Q   for arbitrary   Q : Prop . No theorem about scl and no full formalization for every strand number is claimed. 2

Conjecture 00000000637   C0ldSmi1e  5. Verification, reproducibility, and trust scope  The project pins Lean 4.19.0 and Mathlib v4.19.0, whose exact Git revision is   c44e0c8ee63ca166450922a3 73c7409c5d26b00b . All nine dependency revisions are fixed in   lake-manifest.json . The actual compiler commit was checked as   6caaee842e9495688c1567e78c0e68dbb96942aa . The author and an independent reviewer executed the supplied   verify.py   (22 subprocesses per run). Root and reviewer also built frozen source in separate fresh directories, replayed   Conjecture637.lean ,   Audit.lean , and   Check.lean   with warnings treated as errors, and checked dependencies before and after execution. All final runs passed. Existing pinned Mathlib compiled dependencies were reused; the submitted project’s own build products were absent before each fresh build. The 36 handwritten declarations comprise 15 definitions/abbreviations and 21 theorems, with no handwritten instances.   Audit.lean   prints axiom dependencies for all 36;   Check.lean   also prints definitions and theorem types.   A separate inspection harness inventories every compiled declaration originating in the implementa- tion modules, including generated declarations.   It produces types, safety flags, axiom sets, and transitive dependency checks. That complete inventory has 194 entries: 81 safe logical declarations, 90 unsafe compiler runtime definitions, and 23 unsafe specialization axiom stubs generated by Lean.   The first root and reviewer inspection runs rejected these unclassified stubs.   Both failures are retained.   The subsequent exact classification is justified by the pinned Lean compiler’s specialization code [4] and its proof-erasure marker documentation [5]. Every stub’s name and unsafe dependency closure is explicitly checked; no blanket extra-axiom exemption is used. All 194 entries remain in the records. For   every one of the 81 safe logical declarations , the transitive closure contains no unsafe, partial, or missing dependency, and its axiom set is a subset of   propext ,   Classical.choice , and   Quot.sound . Thus no logical proof depends on the runtime stubs or proof-erasure markers.   There are no admitted proofs, author-added axioms, or   native_decide   uses. The finite permutation checks use ordinary kernel-checked   decide . Group normalization and integer arithmetic likewise produce checked proof terms. No mathematical computation is performed by an external auxiliary program. Python files only orchestrate execution and inspect verification evidence.  Reproduction.   With   the   pinned   toolchain   and   packages   available,   run   lake build ,   then   python3 verify.py ; replay   Check.lean   with   lake env lean -DwarningAsError=true Check.lean . The submission README gives the full independent inspector invocation, frozen hashes, dependency setup, and the locations of successful and failed logs. Inspection metaprogramming is outside the mathematical proof and asserts no theorem.  Review status.   These are local build and independent semantic checks. Maintainer review and competition acceptance remain separate decisions.   The independent review record covers this report and its matching PDF. Definitions-only primary references were used to fix braid terminology; the formal argument proves the required group identities directly.   A source lookup helper did not return a complete search ledger, so the provenance record does not claim that no incidental mathematical results were exposed.  References  [1] I. Tuba and H. Wenzl,   Representations of the braid group   B 3   and of   SL (2 ,   Z ) , Pacific J. Math. 197 (2001), §1.1, p.492. Primary source. [2] J. González-Meneses,   Basic results on braid groups , Ann. Math. Blaise Pascal 18 (2011), §2.1, p.26, equation (2.1). Primary source. [3] J. S. Birman, V. Gebhardt and J. González-Meneses,   Conjugacy in Garside groups III: Periodic braids , J. Algebra 316 (2007), §2, p.748. Primary source. [4] Lean 4.19.0,   specialize.cpp , lines 906–920. Unsafe specialization stubs. [5] Lean 4.19.0,   Init/Prelude.lean , lines 129–137. Compiler proof-erasure marker.  3