PAGE 1
A disproof of conjecture 00000004289
Every almost-free group in the stated sense is ﬂat-free
C0ldSmi1e • October 5, 2026
1 Deﬁnitions and the assertion being refuted
Let G be an abelian group, regarded as a module over Z, and let κ be any cardinal. The bilingual
source deﬁnes the properties
AFκ (G) ⇐ ⇒ G is not free and every subgroup H ≤ G with |H|< κ is free ,
FFκ (G) ⇐ ⇒ every subgroup H ≤ G with |H|< κ is ﬂat .
Free means free as a Z-module, with an arbitrary basis and ﬁnite-support coordinates. Flat means
that tensoring over Z preserves exact sequences, equivalently that it preserves injective module
maps; see [ 1]. All subgroups are included, and the cardinal bound is strict in both deﬁnitions.
The non-free requirement belongs to AFκ , as in the source.
For clarity, keep the threshold and the group size separate:
E(κ, λ ) ⇐ ⇒ ∃ G
(
|G|= λ and AFκ (G) and ¬ FFκ (G)
)
.
The usual reading of “at cardinal λ” uses threshold κ = λ. On this reading the conjecture asserts
that ℵω is the least member of S = {λ : E(λ, λ )}. In particular, it asserts E(ℵω , ℵω ). We
disprove this necessary existence clause and the minimum claim. The argument also covers a
ﬁxed threshold or a threshold unrelated to the group’s size.
2 Complete proof
Lemma 1. Every free abelian group is a ﬂat Z-module.
Proof. If F has basis I, then F ∼=
⊕
i∈I Z. For every abelian group A there is a natural identiﬁ-
cation A ⊗ Z F ∼=
⊕
i∈I A. For an injective homomorphism f : A → B, the induced tensor map
becomes the coordinatewise map ⊕
I f . If its value on a ﬁnite-support tuple is zero, injectivity
of f makes each coordinate zero. Thus the tensor map is injective. The injectivity criterion for
ﬂatness proves the lemma, including an empty or inﬁnite basis.
Theorem 1. For every cardinal κ and every abelian group G, AFκ (G) implies FFκ (G). Conse-
quently E(κ, λ ) is false for all cardinals κ, λ .
Proof. Assume AFκ (G). Let H ≤ G satisfy |H|< κ. The deﬁnition makes H free, so the lemma
makes H ﬂat. This proves FFκ (G) and contradicts the last condition in any proposed witness to
E(κ, λ ).
1

PAGE 2
3 Consequences and logical scope
There is no separating group at ℵω , or at any other cardinality. The set S is empty, so it has no
least member. A least element must belong to the set; a mere lower bound or an inﬁmum of an
empty set would not express the source’s asserted minimum.
The separate ℵ1 implication in the source is true, by the theorem with κ = ℵ1, even without
requiring |G|= ℵ1. No regularity, coﬁnality, inﬁnitude, or positivity assumption on the threshold
is used. If the subgroup range is empty, the same implication still holds. The proof does not
require the non-free conjunct, but the formal deﬁnition retains it exactly.
The source also asserts ZFC provability of the separation, a Shelah black-box construction, and
independence over ZFC at every smaller cardinal. Refuting the necessary existence and minimum
clauses disproves this compound assertion. This submission does not formalize a coded ZFC proof
system, independence, or a black-box construction; a Lean theorem alone is not such a formal-
ization. The unspeciﬁed range of “smaller cardinal” does not aﬀect the universal nonexistence
result.
4 Formal correspondence and veriﬁcation
The project uses Lean 4.19.0 and Mathlib v4.19.0. The carrier has type G : Type u . Its
AddCommGroup G structure provides the canonical integer action. Freeness is Mathlib’s basis-
existence property, Module.Free. Flatness is its tensor-ﬂatness class, Module.Flat, with proved
injectivity and exactness interpretations over rings. The instance Module.Flat.of_free supplies
the lemma. Subgroups are actual elements of AddSubgroup G , with inherited group operations
and cardinality given by Cardinal.mk.
AlmostFree, FlatFree, Separation, and SeparationExists are exactly the predicates stated on
page 1. SeparationCardinals is the set S. The theorem no_separation_exists quantiﬁes in-
dependently over κ and λ in every universe. The ﬁnal theorem conjecture4289_disproof states
¬ IsLeast(S, ℵω ). The cardinal ℵω is Cardinal.aleph Ordinal.omega0 ; ℵ1 is Cardinal.aleph
1. Separate theorems exclude existence at ℵω , show S empty, and specialize the implication at
ℵ1.
The proof is symbolic and needs no external mathematical computation. From the pinned project
in lean/, run
lake build
lake env lean -DwarningAsError=true Conjecture4289.lean
lake env lean -DwarningAsError=true Check.lean
The audit prints every authored deﬁnition, theorem type, and axiom dependency. Veriﬁcation
records cover all compiled proof-module constants, including generated ones, dependency iden-
tities, and the matching PDF. Local checks and independent internal review do not establish
maintainer acceptance.
References
[1] The Stacks Project, Section 10.39, Flat modules and ﬂat ring maps , Deﬁnition 10.39.1 and
Lemma 10.39.5. stacks.math.columbia.edu/tag/00H9.
[2] Mathlib v4.19.0, Mathlib/RingTheory/Flat/Basic.lean, including Module.Flat.of_free.
The exact dependency revision is recorded in the pinned project manifest.
2
