A planar tight signed graph
Disproof of conjecture 00000002161
C0ldSmi1e
5 October 2026
Abstract
The all-positive four-vertex path has independence number 2, positive inertia index 2, and
minimum orientable genus 0. It is connected and noncomplete. It therefore contradicts the
asserted minimum genus 1, whether the minimum is taken separately for every eligible graph
or across the eligible class. A Lean 4 project veriﬁes the counterexample using the standard
rotation-system deﬁnition of orientable cellular embeddings.
1 Statement and scope
The exact bilingual source is supplied as conjecture.md. Its English text is:
Deﬁnition: The inertia bound of signed graphs states the independence number is at most the
positive inertia index. Conjecture: The minimal genus of graphs attaining the tight bound
equals 1 (apart from complete graphs); the genus is computed explicitly via the Euler formula
of 2-cell embeddings.
We retain the printed equality condition α (G) = i+(A), where A is the signed adjacency matrix.
We neither replace the printed inequality by a conventional inertia bound nor assume it holds for
every signed graph. The witness satisﬁes the printed equality itself. Genus has its usual orientable
meaning; a two-cell embedding has open disks as complementary faces. This submission makes
no claim about a reformulation requiring a strictly nonorientable surface.
2 A tight, connected, noncomplete witness
Take the path 0 − 1 − 2 − 3, with all three edge signs +1. The vertices 0, 2 are nonadjacent, so the
graph is not complete. The path is connected. The set {0, 2} is independent, while the disjoint
edges 01 and 23 cover all vertices and each contributes at most one member to an independent
set. Thus α (P4) = 2 .
The adjacency matrix and its characteristic polynomial are
A =


0 1 0 0
1 0 1 0
0 1 0 1
0 0 1 0

 , p (t) = det( tI − A) = t4 − 3t2 + 1.
Put r = (
√
5 + 1)/ 2 and s = (
√
5 − 1)/ 2. Both are positive, rs = 1, and r2 + s2 = 3. Hence
p(t) = ( t − r)(t − s)(t + r)(t + s).
Its complete root multiset is [r, s, −r, −s]. Counting positive eigenvalues with algebraic multiplic-
ity gives i+(A) = 2 ; no numerical approximation is used. This is the ordinary inertia convention
for real symmetric matrices [ 2].
1

Conjecture 00000002161 C0ldSmi1e
3 An actual cellular embedding and its genus
3.1 Rotation systems and their meaning
For a connected ﬁnite graph with no isolated vertex, use one dart for each ordered adjacent pair.
Let λ reverse darts and let ρ cyclically order the darts with each ﬁxed tail. The formal data require
that reversal is a ﬁxed-point-free involution, that the dart-to-ordered-edge map is bijective, and
that the rotation preserves tails and has one orbit in each vertex star. These conditions describe
the original graph, not a diﬀerent multigraph or an arbitrary pair of permutations.
This is the standard combinatorial encoding of an orientable cellular embedding [ 1, Section 2,
Proposition 2.2]. Its geometric meaning can be seen by taking oriented vertex disks, joining
their marked boundary intervals with untwisted edge bands, and capping the resulting boundary
circles with disks. The boundary components correspond to cycles of ρλ, with λ applied ﬁrst.
Conversely, an oriented cellular embedding gives the local cyclic orders.
For this path speciﬁcally, begin with the vertex- 0 disk and attach each successive band and new
vertex disk. Each step joins two disks along a band and produces a disk. The thickening is
therefore a disk; capping its one boundary circle gives the sphere. The central edge arcs have the
prescribed endpoints and disjoint interiors. Thus a genuine genus-zero cellular embedding exists,
independently of merely guessing a genus from numbers.
3.2 The complete ﬁnite certiﬁcate
The following table ﬁxes all dart data; entries in the last two rows are dart labels.
Dart d 0 1 2 3 4 5
Directed edge 01 10 12 21 23 32
λ(d) 1 0 3 2 5 4
ρ(d) 0 2 1 4 3 5
Thus λ = (0 1)(2 3)(4 5) , ρ = (0)(1 2)(3 4)(5) , and
ρλ = (0 2 4 5 3 1) .
There is one face, with boundary walk 0, 1, 2, 3, 2, 1, 0. Repeated edges in this boundary are
allowed: each bridge borders the same face on both sides. The vertex, edge, and face counts are
V = 4, E = 3, F = 1. Euler’s formula for this orientable cellular embedding gives
2 − 2g = V − E + F = 4 − 3 + 1 = 2 , g = 0.
The minimum genus is also 0: it is attained here and every orientable genus is a nonnegative
integer.
Counterexample. The signed path P4 is connected and noncomplete, attains α (P4) = i+(A) = 2 ,
and has minimum genus 0.
If the conjecture asserts minimum genus 1 for every tight noncomplete graph, this witness con-
tradicts it directly. If it asserts a class minimum of 1, it necessarily asserts a lower bound 1 for
each eligible graph’s minimum genus; the same witness contradicts that clause. Restricting the
formal universal clauses to connected graphs is suﬃcient, since a counterexample in that subclass
is a counterexample in the full class.
2

Conjecture 00000002161 C0ldSmi1e
4 Formal speciﬁcation and coverage
The project uses Lean 4.19.0 and Mathlib v4.19.0, with the exact dependency revisions recorded
in lean/lake-manifest.json. All statements below are in namespace Conjecture2161.
Deﬁnition or theorem What is represented or proved
SignedGraph An actual simple graph, symmetric real matrix, edge
entries ±1, and zero entries on every nonedge.
independenceNumber The maximum cardinality over all ﬁnite independent
subsets, with its generic upper and lower speciﬁcations
proved.
path_independence_number The witness set and upper bound over all 16 subsets
establish the exact value 2.
path_roots,
path_positive_inertia
The actual matrix characteristic polynomial has the
complete root multiset above; its positive part has
cardinality 2.
RotationSystem Every incidence, reversal, graph-connectedness,
nonempty-star and cyclic-order condition described on
page 2.
RotationSystem.Face The quotient of darts by the actual face-permutation
orbit relation. A named instance proves this type ﬁnite.
HasCellularGenus Existence of a valid rotation system satisfying
V − E + F = 2 − 2g with integer arithmetic.
IsMinimumGenus A realized genus and a lower bound for every other
realized genus; no empty inﬁmum or default genus
value.
counterexample_certificate Connectedness, noncompleteness, exact printed
equality, and minimum genus 0.
not_per_graph_genus_one,
not_class_minimum_one
Negations of the necessary clauses for the two readings
of the conjecture.
F ormalization boundary . Lean checks the entire ﬁnite rotation-system certiﬁcate, actual face
quotient cardinality, integer Euler equality, existential genus certiﬁcate, minimum argument, and
ﬁnal negations. The project uses the standard combinatorial deﬁnition of orientable cellular
embedding, with the geometric correspondence explained above and cited. It does not additionally
formalize the disk-and-band realization theorem in Mathlib’s general topology language. No
geometric-realization axiom is inserted into Lean. The restriction to connected noncomplete
graphs avoids the isolated-vertex degeneracy of a dart-only representation.
T rust and execution. The 50 handwritten declarations comprise 20 deﬁnitions/structures,
27 theorems, and 3 named instances. Audit2161.lean prints the axiom dependencies of all 50;
Check.lean also displays the deﬁnitions and theorem types. The project contains no admitted
proof, native_decide, or custom axiom. Small ﬁnite checks use ordinary kernel-checked decide.
Builds and source replays treat warnings as errors. An additional inspection inventories generated
declarations and checks transitive logical dependencies. Every logical declaration depends only
on propext, Classical.choice, and Quot.sound. Compiler runtime artifacts are inventoried
separately and are absent from all logical dependency closures.
The printed inequality . The purported universal inequality α ≤ i+ is not used as an axiom:
for example, P3 has α = 2 and i+ = 1 . That observation is only a scope check. The disproof
above rests on P4, which attains the equality exactly as printed, together with its genus-zero
embedding.
3

Conjecture 00000002161 C0ldSmi1e
5 Independent computations and reproduction
5.1 Exact auxiliary checks
The separate Python checker in auxiliary/ uses exact rational arithmetic and only the standard
library. It enumerates all 16 vertex subsets and expands the determinant by all 24 permutations.
For p(t) = t4 − 3t2 + 1, its exact Sturm sequence is
p(t), 4t3 − 6t, 3
2 t2 − 1, 10
3 t, 1.
The sign-variation counts at −∞ , 0, +∞ are 4, 2, 0, giving two negative and two positive roots
and no zero root. The checker handles multiplicity through square-free layers; a repeated-root
test is included. The Sturm convention is documented in [ 3].
The same checker independently veriﬁes every dart, vertex rotation and face orbit. It realizes
the face as an oriented six-sided polygon with paired sides, reconstructs the quotient vertices,
and veriﬁes each vertex link is a circle. It also checks the straight-line drawing with vertices
(0, 0), (1, 0), (2, 0), (3, 0) for edge crossings and nonincident vertices in edges. Boundary tests
include K2, P3, K3, and deliberately invalid certiﬁcates/drawings. The supplied certiﬁcate records
all intermediate values, including (V, E, F ) = (4 , 3, 1) and g = 0.
5.2 Commands
From the submission folder, with Python 3 and the pinned Lean toolchain:
cd lean
lake exe cache get
lake build
lake env lean -DwarningAsError=true Conjecture2161.lean
lake env lean -DwarningAsError=true Audit2161.lean
lake env lean -DwarningAsError=true Check.lean
cd ..
python3 auxiliary/replay.py
The pinned manifest must be preserved. Initial dependency/cache retrieval requires network
access. The replay runs the exact checker afresh and requires byte-for-byte agreement with
the supplied certiﬁcate. README.md and verification/ document the independent clean-build
procedure, dependency identities, source hashes, trust audit, and local semantic review. These
are local veriﬁcation records, not maintainer acceptance or a replacement for the repository’s
review process.
References
[1] J. L. Gross and T. W. Tucker, Enumerating Graph Embeddings and Partial-Duals by Genus and
Euler Genus , Enumerative Combinatorics and Applications 1:1 (2021), Article S2S1.
doi:10.54550/ECA2021V1S1S1.
[2] Y. Nakatsukasa and V. Noferini, Inertia laws and localization of real eigenvalues for generalized
indeﬁnite eigenvalue problems . arXiv:1711.00495.
[3] P. Pébay, J. M. Rojas, and D. C. Thompson, Sturm’s Theorem with Endpoints . arXiv:2208.07904.
4