A disproof of conjecture 00000000989
Complete positivity excludes positive-map indecomposability
C0ldSmi1e • October 5, 2026
1 Statement and mathematical conventions
The bilingual conjecture asks for an explicit family of indecomposable completely positive maps
of dimension d with Choi rank d2 −1. We use the standard positive-map meaning of indecompos-
ability, stated below. The source does not specify the domain and codomain, dimension range, or
family index. We take a dimension- d map to be a complex-linear map Φ : Md(C) → M d(C) for
a positive integer d; d is the matrix side length. A family must have at least one member. The
obstruction applies in every positive dimension and at every Choi rank, so no particular lower
cutoﬀ or family indexing is needed.
A matrix is positive when it is Hermitian positive semideﬁnite. A linear map is positive if it
preserves such matrices, and completely positive (CP) if idk ⊗Φ is positive for every positive
integer k. A positive map is decomposable if it can be written
Φ = S + τ ◦T, S, T completely positive ,
where τ(X) = X T is ordinary matrix transpose on the output algebra. A positive map is in-
decomposable if no such representation exists. This is the convention in [ 1, Section 1]. The
summands may be zero; there is no requirement of trace preservation or unitality.
This notion diﬀers from an extreme ray of a cone, an extreme point of a normalized convex
set, or indecomposability under direct sums. The source speciﬁes none of those alternatives. Its
parenthetical description “extremal Choi rank” gives no optimization class and does not change
the stated numerical equality.
For clarity, with matrix units Eij we use the input-ﬁrst Choi convention
CΦ =
d∑
i,j=1
Eij ⊗ Φ( Eij), (CΦ )(i,k),(j,ℓ) = Φ( Eij)kℓ.
The Choi rank is the ordinary complex matrix rank of this d2-by-d2 matrix, not the rank of Φ
as a linear transformation. See [ 1, Section 2] for this tensor order and [ 2, Section 1] for the rank
convention (with exchanged tensor factors).
2 Complete proof
Lemma 1. The zero linear map between complex matrix algebras is completely positive.
Proof. For each positive integer k, its ampliation sends every matrix to the zero matrix. The
zero matrix is Hermitian positive semideﬁnite. Thus every ampliation preserves positive matrices,
exactly as required.
1

Theorem 1. Every completely positive map between complex matrix algebras is decomposable.
Hence no such map is indecomposable in the positive-map sense.
Proof. Let Φ be completely positive. In the deﬁning decomposition, choose S = Φ and T = 0 .
Both are completely positive, and
S + τ ◦T = Φ + τ ◦0 = Φ .
This is a permitted decomposition, contradicting indecomposability.
In particular, for every positive integer d there is no map Φ : Md(C) → M d(C) that is simultane-
ously completely positive, indecomposable, and of Choi rank d2 − 1. The rank condition cannot
restore existence: the ﬁrst two conditions already contradict each other. This conclusion does
not require a rank estimate or an unproved Choi-matrix characterization of complete positivity.
Finally, suppose a proposed family has a nonempty index set I, positive dimensions di, and maps
Φ i satisfying all the stated properties. Choose i ∈ I. The preceding theorem contradicts the
properties of Φ i. Thus no nonempty family exists, and in particular no explicit nonempty family
exists. No artiﬁcial predicate for “explicitness” is needed in the argument.
3 Formalization and veriﬁcation
The accompanying Lean project uses Lean 4.19.0 and Mathlib v4.19.0. Its objects are ac-
tual complex-linear maps on complex matrices. Matrix positivity has its Hermitian positive-
semideﬁnite meaning; complete positivity concerns all positive ﬁnite ampliation levels. Map
addition, composition, zero and transpose have their ordinary matrix meanings. The source re-
tains an actual Choi matrix and its complex rank in the specialization to the conjecture, and
explicitly addresses the nonempty family conclusion.
The proof is symbolic. No numerical experiment or external computation is needed as a mathe-
matical premise. Veriﬁcation records accompany the project and distinguish local formal checking
and independent internal review from maintainer acceptance.
From the pinned project in lean/, run
lake build
lake env lean -DwarningAsError=true Conjecture989.lean
lake env lean -DwarningAsError=true Check.lean
The default target builds the proof. The audit source prints the deﬁnitions, theorem types and
axiom dependencies; the accompanying records also inspect all constants originating in the com-
piled proof modules, including generated ones. The formal correspondence and exact execution
identities are detailed in the submission’s veriﬁcation records.
References
[1] A. Müller-Hermes. Decomposable Pauli diagonal maps and Tensor Squares of Qubit Maps .
arXiv:2006.14543v1, 2020, Sections 1–2. arxiv.org/abs/2006.14543v1.
[2] M. Girard et al. On the mixed-unitary rank of quantum channels . Author manuscript, March
31, 2020, Section 1, equations (1)–(3). Author-hosted manuscript.
2
